Random thoughts
2022-Dec-21
Link
Random
-----

I am lucky to observe the world through not only my eyes, my sense, and my perception but also my mind with a mathematical perspective. Almost any natural phenomenon on the earth can be modeled by an equation or a set of equations. A number of physical models have been developed throughout the course of human history. To name a few of lots of examples, a simple equation of motion (s = vt) can describe the behavior of an object as a function of time, wave equation (differential equation) describes the behavior of waves and other physical systems like waves, the Navier-Stokes equation describes the behavior of flowing fluids can is used in numerical weather prediction. Moreover, we also have a bunch of tools to shape the world in the way we want through the machine we use to harvest natural resources, the species we bring to an end, and the technology we are developing and improving. However, to come into human, it is so complicated. I wonder whether we have a model to simulate all of the possible scenarios of the development of a man or a woman. I guess We have so many uncertainties in that model, but if we have such a model, what should be the output of that model? The output should be happiness, time, health, career, success, power, money, ..., or combinations of those things? Possible influenced forces can be the parents, teachers, and friends who spend time with us and share with us joyfulness and sadness, the books we read, the strangers we encounter, the music we listen to, the places we live and visit, the culture we experience, the decision we make, the relationship we had, and all of the other thing. It also can be viewed as a nested function corresponding to different stages in life with lots of variables.

For simplification, we can think of a simple model such that time and happiness are the final outcomes. So what is the best strategy for a human being to maximize their output? Depending on our expectations, one may want to get more money to live a luxurious life, others may want to live with happiness, one wants to live a meaningful life by helping others, one wants to live a simple life with modest accessories, or one wish to live a colorful live with lots of experiences, etc. To me, life is a series of causes and effects where we need to make choices about which one is better or suitable, and meaningful life is a series of connections and healthy relationships.

Money is essential to have a life. On the other aspect, money is necessary for the evolution of humanity! Why do we want to get more money? Many believe money can make life easier but I guess it make us more complicated. Why do we want to acquire power? Why do some people leave a country to come to a (better) country? Why do we sacrifice our time to do what we don't want to do? Why do we want to put our health at risk for the purpose of making money? Why don't we choose one thing instead of others? Many why questions we can ask but hard to find the answers.

I would say it is nearly impossible to have such a model, but three things I believe are important for any human being: love, gratitude, and honesty. Finally, what makes us human are love, compassion, and empathy.

P/S: I also want to appreciate all the people who have shaped my mind and made me where I stand right now to write these things. These lines of words are just my random thoughts that I want to share. I felt like It was easier for me to write in English but could be easily translated into Vietnamese by google translate. 
Plus, we are all connected!!!